# NDT
smart-seq for nipple, duct and TEB from mammary gland

The murine mammary gland is sustained by distinct pools of stem cells that are limited in space and time, exhibiting diverse multipotency and activity. However, the specific identities of these stem cells and their contributions to mammary gland homeostasis are not well understood. In this study, we investigated the spatial heterogeneity of the mammary gland at the single-cell transcription level. Our findings reveal that mammary basal cells exhibit spatially distinct populations and characteristics, which can be further divided based on the expression of Cd34 and Cd200 markers. Notably, Cd34-Cd200+ basal cells demonstrate strong long-term self-renewal ability and possess the highest stem cell frequency, while Cd34+Cd200- basal cells show reduced stem cell potency. Through lineage tracing experiments using their signature genes, we discovered that Bcl11b+ cells were enriched in the Cd34-Cd200+ population and exhibited bipotency even in the postnatal mammary gland, with an increasing contribution to mammary epithelia observed during long-term tracing and after multiple rounds of pregnancies. Conversely, lineage tracing of Sema3a+ cells, enriched in the Cd34+Cd200- population, predominantly revealed their unipotent nature and significant contribution during alveologenesis. Notably, the Bcl11b+ cells displayed a slow response to pregnancy but contributed to long-term mammary homeostasis, in contrast to the rapid response observed in Sema3a+ cells. Importantly, depletion of Bcl11b in Krt14+ mammary basal cells resulted in reduced bipotency of mammary stem cells and impaired their long-term contribution to the mammary gland. Overall, our study identifies distinct bipotent and unipotent populations of
mammary basal cells with different dynamic properties that play critical roles in maintaining postnatal mammary homeostasis. These findings are crucial for advancing our
understanding of breast health and breast cancer research.

For more information, please refer to **Distinct Mammary Stem Cells Orchestrate the Long-term Homeostasis of Adult Mammary Gland**
